Remove PWA installability requirement to have a Service Worker (#34127)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/progressive_web_apps/tutorials/cycletracker/secure_connection/index.md

![Light green web page with a large header, a form with a legend, two date pickers and a button. The bottom shows two placeholder menstrual cycles and a header.](filefile.jpg)

> We are viewing our page using the `file://` protocol. This works for the current state of our codebase, and will continue to suffice as we [add JavaScript functionality](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/CycleTracker/JavaScript_functionality). However, PWAs require a secure connection, as do several APIs such as Service Workers. PWAs need to be served from a web server over `https` or a local development environment, using `localhost`, `127.0.0.1`, with or without a port number. If we view our finished app using the `file://` protocol, our [manifest file](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/CycleTracker/Manifest_file) will be ignored and any [service workers](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/CycleTracker/Service_workers) we add will fail.

Reviewer: As we continue to add javascript using `file` will _not_ suffice.

```suggestion
We are viewing our page using the `file://` protocol. This works for the current state of our codebase but not suffice as we [add JavaScript functionality](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/CycleTracker/JavaScript_functionality).
The reason for this is that PWAs and some of their commonly used APIs, such as the Service Worker API, require a secure connection. 
For this reason PWAs must be served using the `https` protocol, or from a local development environment using `localhost` or `127.0.0.1` — with or without a port number. If we view our finished app using the `file://` protocol, our [manifest file](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/CycleTracker/Manifest_file) will be ignored and any [service workers](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Tutorials/CycleTracker/Service_workers) we add will fail.
```

Author: @hamishwillee Does this mean that `file` generally is not considered a secure context, or rather that is specifically doesn't work with service workers and a manifest? I was just wondering because https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Guides/Making_PWAs_installable#installability and https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Secure_Contexts both mention using file as a secure context so might need updating as well.

Reviewer: @FormularSumo I "corrected" this because the original text was inconsistent. First it said that we were OK using the file protocol, and then the rest says if we view our finished app using the `file://` protocol our manifest file will be ignored and any service workers will fail.

It seemed more likely to me that the first part was wrong than all that stuff in the second part was wrong. I then found https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Service_Worker_API/Using_Service_Workers#setting_up_to_play_with_service_workers which states:

>  To run code using service workers, you'll need to serve your code via HTTPS — Service workers are restricted to running across HTTPS for security reasons. A server supporting HTTPS is necessary. To host experiments, you can use a service such as GitHub, Netlify, Vercel, etc. In order to facilitate local development, localhost is considered a secure origin by browsers as well.

That strongly implies that `file://` is _not_ considered secure in the service worker context. 

But you're right that other docs indicate that `file://` is treated as a secure context so I can't explain this inconsistency - and I should have questioned this. It could possibly be due to files being considered opaque origins, so this all falls over due to CORS. 

@wbamberg Can you advise here or recommend anyone else who might know. Or are we going to have to test :-)

Reviewer 2: > Or are we going to have to test :-)

I tested. If you want to play along I have a very minimal PWA at https://github.com/wbamberg/minimal-pwa/.

It looks as if the PWA requirement is different from the general "Secure context" requirement.

The "Secure context" test, specced in https://w3c.github.io/webappsec-secure-contexts/ and documented on MDN at https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Secure_Contexts, allows `file` (https://w3c.github.io/webappsec-secure-contexts/#is-origin-trustworthy, step 6).

You can test this by opening any .html file in a browser and checking for `navigator.serviceWorker` in the console:

<img width="771" alt="Screen Shot 2024-06-24 at 10 06 53 AM" src="https://github.com/mdn/content/assets/432915/e08d91b1-9535-4d21-8af2-21b0d12fd6fa">

This is my "minimal PWA", and note that you don't get the "Install" button or the install icon in the URL bar.

If I run it locally using "python3 -m http.server", then:

- if I visit the page at http://[::]:8000/, then I don't get `navigator.serviceWorker` or the PWA "Install" button:

<img width="811" alt="Screen Shot 2024-06-24 at 10 28 51 AM" src="https://github.com/mdn/content/assets/432915/5540337a-af61-432a-8716-b5331972fcd8">

- if I visit it at "http://localhost:8000/" then I get both:

<img width="811" alt="Screen Shot 2024-06-24 at 10 29 52 AM" src="https://github.com/mdn/content/assets/432915/7b5fd455-23c9-4ae4-9d06-df776202de0e">

- if I visit it at a real HTTPS URL, like https://wbamberg.github.io/minimal-pwa/, then I get both:

<img width="811" alt="Screen Shot 2024-06-24 at 10 30 52 AM" src="https://github.com/mdn/content/assets/432915/5c267512-e889-40f6-bc90-ea205631d3ef">

Summary:

https://www.iconfinder.com/iconsets/bitsies

|        | file:///Users/will/test/minimal-pwa/index.html | http://[::]:8000/ | http://localhost:8000/ | https://wbamberg.github.io/minimal-pwa/ |
| ------ | ---------------------------------------------- | ----------------- | ---------------------- | --------------------------------------- |
| Secure context | ✅                                         | ❌            |        ✅                |                 ✅                       |
| PWA-enabled | ❌                                        | ❌            |              ✅          |               ✅                          |

Reviewer 2: This is quite surprising, and implies there might be a few places where we say "secure context" in the context of PWAs, and shouldn't. The page at https://web.dev/articles/install-criteria does **not* say "secure context", it says "HTTPS" (but does not mention the localhost exception).

Reviewer: Yes, so basically you need secure context to use APIs that require a secure context. You need https/localhost/loopback IP address to install using a manifest file (note, I didn't say "install PWA"). I have tried to separate this in #34394
